docs/docs/index.md, before:

# Welcome to Jac

**One Language for AI-Native Full-Stack Development**

Jac is a programming language that extends Python with powerful capabilities for building modern AI-powered applications. Write backend logic, frontend interfaces, and AI integrations in a single unified language.

---

## Get Started

- [Quick Guide](quick-guide/index.md) - Start building in 5 minutes
- [Tutorials](tutorials/index.md) - In-depth learning paths
- [Reference](reference/language/index.md) - Complete language documentation

---

## Core Principles

1. **AI-Native** - LLMs as first-class types via Meaning Typed Programming
2. **Full-Stack in One Language** - React components alongside server code
3. **Python & JavaScript Superset** - Use `numpy`, `pandas`, `react`, `tailwind` directly
4. **Object-Spatial Programming** - Model domains as graphs with walkers
5. **Cloud-Native** - One command to production with `jac start --scale`
6. **Human + AI Readable** - Clean syntax for developers and AI models alike

---

## Quick Install

```bash
pip install jaclang[all]
```

[Get started now](quick-guide/index.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

Commit message:

docs: update Jac messaging and simplify run commands
- Update language description from "extends Python" to "superset of both
  Python and TypeScript/JavaScript" throughout documentation
- Add mention of novel AI constructs (by llm()) in key intro sections
- Clarify that jaseci is a meta-package bundling all ecosystem packages
- Add jac-super to package lists where missing
- Add jac --version verification step with cache warming note
- Add "Code with AI assistance" to Why Jac table
- Simplify jac run to just jac (since run is default)
- Add note that jac is shorthand for jac run
- Update pyproject.toml description

docs/docs/index.md, after:

# Welcome to Jac

**One Language for AI-Native Full-Stack Development**

Jac is a programming language and superset of both Python and TypeScript/JavaScript, with novel constructs for AI-integrated programming. Access the entire PyPI and npm ecosystems while using features like `by llm()` to seamlessly weave AI into your code. Write backend logic, frontend interfaces, and AI integrations in a single unified language.

---

## Get Started

- [Quick Guide](quick-guide/index.md) - Start building in 5 minutes
- [Tutorials](tutorials/index.md) - In-depth learning paths
- [Reference](reference/language/index.md) - Complete language documentation

---

## Core Principles

1. **AI-Native** - LLMs as first-class types via Meaning Typed Programming
2. **Full-Stack in One Language** - React components alongside server code
3. **Python & JavaScript Superset** - Use `numpy`, `pandas`, `react`, `tailwind` directly
4. **Object-Spatial Programming** - Model domains as graphs with walkers
5. **Cloud-Native** - One command to production with `jac start --scale`
6. **Human + AI Readable** - Clean syntax for developers and AI models alike

---

## Quick Install

```bash
pip install jaclang[all]
```

[Get started now](quick-guide/index.md){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
