docs/docs/reference/language/ai-integration.md, before:

# Part V: AI Integration

**In this part:**

- [Meaning Typed Programming](#meaning-typed-programming) - Intent as specification
- [Semantic Strings](#semantic-strings) - The `sem` keyword for descriptions
- [The `by` Operator and LLM Delegation](#the-by-operator-and-llm-delegation) - Model config, tools, streaming
- [Agentic AI Patterns](#agentic-ai-patterns) - AI walkers, multi-agent systems

---

Jac's AI integration goes beyond simple API calls. With "Meaning Typed Programming," you write function signatures that describe *what* you want, and the LLM figures out *how* to do it. This inverts the traditional programming model: instead of writing algorithms, you declare intent and let AI provide the implementation. The `by llm` operator makes this seamless.

> **Prerequisites:**
>
> - [The `by` Operator](foundation.md#9-the-by-operator) - Basic syntax
> - [Function Declaration](functions-objects.md#1-function-declaration) - Function signatures
>
> **Required Plugin:** `pip install byllm`

## Meaning Typed Programming

Meaning Typed Programming (MTP) is Jac's core AI paradigm. Your function signature -- the name, parameter names, and types -- becomes the specification. The LLM reads this "meaning" and generates appropriate behavior. This works because well-named functions already describe their intent; MTP just makes that intent executable.

### 1 The Concept

Meaning Typed Programming treats semantic intent as a first-class type. You declare *what* you want, and AI provides *how*:

```jac
# The function signature IS the specification
def classify_sentiment(text: str) -> str by llm;

# Usage - the LLM infers behavior from the name and types
with entry {
    result = classify_sentiment("I love this product!");
    # result = "positive"
}
```

### 2 Implicit vs Explicit Semantics

**Implicit** -- derived from function/parameter names:

```jac
def translate_to_spanish(text: str) -> str by llm;
```

**Explicit** -- using `sem` for detailed descriptions:

```jac
sem classify = """
Analyze the emotional tone of the input text.
Return exactly one of: 'positive', 'negative', 'neutral'.
Consider context and sarcasm.
""";

def classify(text: str) -> str by llm;
```

---

## Semantic Strings

When function names alone don't provide enough context, use `sem` (semantic) declarations to add detailed descriptions. The LLM reads these descriptions as part of its prompt, giving you precise control over behavior. Think of `sem` as documentation that actually affects execution.

### 1 The `sem` Keyword

The `sem` keyword attaches semantic descriptions to functions, parameters, type fields, and enum values. These strings are included in the compiler-generated prompt so the LLM sees them at runtime.

```jac
# Function-level semantic
sem classify_sentiment = """
Analyze the emotional tone of the text.
Return 'positive', 'negative', or 'neutral'.
Consider nuance, sarcasm, and context.
""";
def classify_sentiment(text: str) -> str by llm;

# Field-level semantic
obj Product { has price: float; }
sem Product.price = "Price in USD, numeric value";

# Enum value semantic
enum Priority { LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH }
sem Priority.HIGH = "Urgent: requires immediate attention";
```

!!! tip "Best practice"
    Always use `sem` to provide context for `by llm()` functions and parameters. Docstrings are for human documentation (and auto-generated API docs) but are **not** included in compiler-generated prompts. Only `sem` declarations affect LLM behavior.

### 2 Parameter Semantics

```jac
sem analyze_code.code = "The source code to analyze";
sem analyze_code.language = "Programming language (python, javascript, etc.)";
sem analyze_code.return = "A structured analysis with issues and suggestions";

def analyze_code(code: str, language: str) -> dict by llm;
```

### 3 Complex Semantic Types

```jac
obj CodeAnalysis {
    has issues: list[str];
    has suggestions: list[str];
    has complexity_score: int;
    has summary: str;
}

sem analyze.return = """
Return a CodeAnalysis object with:
- issues: List of problems found
- suggestions: Improvement recommendations
- complexity_score: 1-10 complexity rating
- summary: One paragraph overview
""";

def analyze(code: str) -> CodeAnalysis by llm;
```

---

## The `by` Operator and LLM Delegation

### 1 Basic Usage

```jac
# Function delegation
def translate(text: str, target_lang: str) -> str by llm;

def summarize(article: str) -> str by llm;

def extract_entities(text: str) -> list[str] by llm;

# Inline expression
with entry {
    response = "Explain quantum computing in simple terms" by llm;
}
```

### 2 Chained Transformations

```jac
with entry {
    text = "Some input text";
    result = text
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Correct grammar"))
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Simplify language"))
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Translate to Spanish"));
}
```

### 3 Model Configuration

```jac
def summarize(text: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="gpt-4",
    temperature=0.7,
    max_tokens=2000
);

def creative_story(prompt: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="claude-sonnet-4-6",
    temperature=1.0
);
```

**Configuration Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `model_name` | str | LLM provider/model identifier |
| `temperature` | float | Creativity (0.0-2.0) |
| `max_tokens` | int | Maximum response tokens |
| `stream` | bool | Enable streaming output |
| `tools` | list | Functions for tool calling (enables ReAct loop) |
| `context` | list[str] | Additional system instructions |

### Type Validation

byLLM validates that LLM responses match the declared return type. If the LLM returns an invalid type, byLLM will:

1. **Attempt coercion** -- e.g., string `"5"` becomes integer `5`
2. **Raise an error** if coercion fails

This means your Jac type system functions as the LLM's output schema. Declaring `-> int` guarantees you receive an integer, and declaring `-> MyObj` guarantees you receive a properly structured object.

### 4 Tool Calling (ReAct)

```jac
# Stub implementations for API calls
def fetch_weather_api(city: str) -> str {
    return f"Weather data for {city}";
}

def web_search_api(query: str) -> list[str] {
    return [f"Result for {query}"];
}

def get_weather(city: str) -> str {
    # Actual implementation
    return fetch_weather_api(city);
}

def search_web(query: str) -> list[str] {
    # Actual implementation
    return web_search_api(query);
}

def answer_question(question: str) -> str by llm(
    tools=[get_weather, search_web]
);

# The LLM can now call these tools to answer questions
with entry {
    result = answer_question("What's the weather in Paris?");
}
```

### 5 Streaming Responses

```jac
def stream_story(prompt: str) -> str by llm(stream=True);

# Returns generator
with entry {
    for chunk in stream_story("Tell me a story") {
        print(chunk, end="");
    }
}
```

### 6 Multimodal Input

```jac
import from byllm { Image, Video }

def describe_image(image: Image) -> str by llm;
def analyze_video(video: Video) -> str by llm;

# Usage
with entry {
    description = describe_image(Image("photo.jpg"));
    description = describe_image(Image("https://example.com/image.png"));
}
```

### 7 Testing with MockLLM

```jac
def classify(text: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="mockllm",
    config={"outputs": ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]}
);

test "classification" {
    result = classify("Great product!");
    assert result in ["positive", "negative", "neutral"];
}
```

### 9 Configuration via jac.toml

```toml
[plugins.byllm.model]
default = "gpt-4"

[plugins.byllm.call_params]
temperature = 0.7
max_tokens = 1000

[plugins.byllm.litellm]
api_base = "http://localhost:4000"
```

### 10 Python Library Mode

Use `by` in pure Python with decorators:

```python
from byllm import by, Model

@by(Model("gpt-4"))
def summarize(text: str) -> str:
    """Summarize the given text."""
    pass

result = summarize("Long article text...")
```

---

## Agentic AI Patterns

### 1 AI Agents as Walkers

```jac
walker AIAgent {
    has goal: str;
    has memory: list = [];

    can decide with Node entry {
        context = f"Goal: {self.goal}\nCurrent: {here}\nMemory: {self.memory}";
        decision = context by llm("Decide next action");
        self.memory.append({"location": here, "decision": decision});
        # Act on decision
        visit [-->];
    }
}
```

### 2 Tool-Using Agents

Agents combine LLM reasoning with tool functions. The LLM decides which tools to call and in what order (ReAct loop):

```jac
import from byllm.lib { Model }

glob llm = Model(model_name="gpt-4o");

glob kb: dict = {
    "products": ["Widget A", "Widget B", "Service X"],
    "prices": {"Widget A": 99, "Widget B": 149, "Service X": 29},
    "inventory": {"Widget A": 50, "Widget B": 0, "Service X": 999}
};

"""List all available products."""
def list_products() -> list[str] {
    return kb["products"];
}

"""Get the price of a product."""
def get_price(product: str) -> str {
    if product in kb["prices"] {
        return f"${kb['prices'][product]}";
    }
    return "Product not found";
}

"""Check if a product is in stock."""
def check_inventory(product: str) -> str {
    qty = kb["inventory"].get(product, 0);
    return f"In stock ({qty} available)" if qty > 0 else "Out of stock";
}

def sales_agent(request: str) -> str by llm(
    tools=[list_products, get_price, check_inventory]
);
sem sales_agent = "Help customers browse products, check prices and availability.";
```

### 3 Context Injection with `incl_info`

Pass additional runtime context to the LLM without modifying function signatures:

```jac
glob company_info = """
Company: TechCorp
Products: CloudDB, SecureAuth, DataViz
Support Hours: 9 AM - 5 PM EST
""";

def support_agent(question: str) -> str by llm(
    incl_info={"company_context": company_info}
);
sem support_agent = "Answer customer questions about our products and services.";
```

The `incl_info` dict keys and values are injected into the prompt as additional context. This is useful for dynamic information that changes between calls.

### 4 Agentic Walkers

Combine tools with graph traversal for AI agents that navigate data structures:

```jac
node Document {
    has title: str;
    has content: str;
    has summary: str = "";
}

def summarize(content: str) -> str by llm();
sem summarize = "Summarize this document in 2-3 sentences.";

walker DocumentAgent {
    has query: str;

    can process with Root entry {
        all_docs = [-->](?:Document);

        for doc in all_docs {
            if self.query.lower() in doc.content.lower() {
                doc.summary = summarize(doc.content);
                report {"title": doc.title, "summary": doc.summary};
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### 5 Multi-Agent Systems

```jac
walker Coordinator {
    can coordinate with Root entry {
        research = root spawn Researcher(topic="AI");
        writer = root spawn Writer(style="technical");
        reviewer = root spawn Reviewer();

        report {
            "research": research.reports,
            "draft": writer.reports,
            "review": reviewer.reports
        };
    }
}
```

---

## Learn More

**Tutorials:**

- [byLLM Quickstart](../../tutorials/ai/quickstart.md) - Your first AI function
- [Structured Outputs](../../tutorials/ai/structured-outputs.md) - Type-safe LLM responses
- [Agentic AI](../../tutorials/ai/agentic.md) - Tool calling and ReAct pattern

**Examples:**

- [EmailBuddy](../../tutorials/examples/emailbuddy.md) - AI email assistant
- [RAG Chatbot](../../tutorials/examples/rag-chatbot.md) - Document Q&A

**Related Reference:**

- [byLLM Reference](../plugins/byllm.md) - Complete API documentation

Commit message:

feat: make `llm` a builtin name for zero-config `by llm()` usage
The `llm` name is now a language builtin (like `printgraph`), automatically
available in any Jac file without explicit import or `glob llm` declaration.

Core changes:
- Add `default_llm` hookable method to JacByLLM in runtime.jac
- Register `llm` in runtimelib/builtin.jac __all__ for auto-import
- Add lazy `_get_llm` resolution via __getattr__ in builtin.impl.jac
- Add @hookimpl default_llm in byllm plugin returning configured Model

The default model is configured via [plugins.byllm.model] in jac.toml.
Users can still override with `glob llm = Model(...)` for custom config.

docs/docs/reference/language/ai-integration.md, after:

# Part V: AI Integration

**In this part:**

- [Meaning Typed Programming](#meaning-typed-programming) - Intent as specification
- [Semantic Strings](#semantic-strings) - The `sem` keyword for descriptions
- [The `by` Operator and LLM Delegation](#the-by-operator-and-llm-delegation) - Model config, tools, streaming
- [Agentic AI Patterns](#agentic-ai-patterns) - AI walkers, multi-agent systems

---

Jac's AI integration goes beyond simple API calls. With "Meaning Typed Programming," you write function signatures that describe *what* you want, and the LLM figures out *how* to do it. This inverts the traditional programming model: instead of writing algorithms, you declare intent and let AI provide the implementation. The `by llm` operator makes this seamless.

> **Prerequisites:**
>
> - [The `by` Operator](foundation.md#9-the-by-operator) - Basic syntax
> - [Function Declaration](functions-objects.md#1-function-declaration) - Function signatures
>
> **Required Plugin:** `pip install byllm`

!!! tip "Builtin `llm`"
    The `llm` name is a **built-in** -- it is automatically available without imports. By default it uses the model configured in your `jac.toml` under `[plugins.byllm.model]` (defaults to `gpt-4o-mini`). You can override it in any file with `glob llm = Model(...)` for custom configuration. See [byLLM Reference](../plugins/byllm.md#default-model-configuration) for details.

## Meaning Typed Programming

Meaning Typed Programming (MTP) is Jac's core AI paradigm. Your function signature -- the name, parameter names, and types -- becomes the specification. The LLM reads this "meaning" and generates appropriate behavior. This works because well-named functions already describe their intent; MTP just makes that intent executable.

### 1 The Concept

Meaning Typed Programming treats semantic intent as a first-class type. You declare *what* you want, and AI provides *how*:

```jac
# The function signature IS the specification
def classify_sentiment(text: str) -> str by llm;

# Usage - the LLM infers behavior from the name and types
with entry {
    result = classify_sentiment("I love this product!");
    # result = "positive"
}
```

### 2 Implicit vs Explicit Semantics

**Implicit** -- derived from function/parameter names:

```jac
def translate_to_spanish(text: str) -> str by llm;
```

**Explicit** -- using `sem` for detailed descriptions:

```jac
sem classify = """
Analyze the emotional tone of the input text.
Return exactly one of: 'positive', 'negative', 'neutral'.
Consider context and sarcasm.
""";

def classify(text: str) -> str by llm;
```

---

## Semantic Strings

When function names alone don't provide enough context, use `sem` (semantic) declarations to add detailed descriptions. The LLM reads these descriptions as part of its prompt, giving you precise control over behavior. Think of `sem` as documentation that actually affects execution.

### 1 The `sem` Keyword

The `sem` keyword attaches semantic descriptions to functions, parameters, type fields, and enum values. These strings are included in the compiler-generated prompt so the LLM sees them at runtime.

```jac
# Function-level semantic
sem classify_sentiment = """
Analyze the emotional tone of the text.
Return 'positive', 'negative', or 'neutral'.
Consider nuance, sarcasm, and context.
""";
def classify_sentiment(text: str) -> str by llm;

# Field-level semantic
obj Product { has price: float; }
sem Product.price = "Price in USD, numeric value";

# Enum value semantic
enum Priority { LOW, MEDIUM, HIGH }
sem Priority.HIGH = "Urgent: requires immediate attention";
```

!!! tip "Best practice"
    Always use `sem` to provide context for `by llm()` functions and parameters. Docstrings are for human documentation (and auto-generated API docs) but are **not** included in compiler-generated prompts. Only `sem` declarations affect LLM behavior.

### 2 Parameter Semantics

```jac
sem analyze_code.code = "The source code to analyze";
sem analyze_code.language = "Programming language (python, javascript, etc.)";
sem analyze_code.return = "A structured analysis with issues and suggestions";

def analyze_code(code: str, language: str) -> dict by llm;
```

### 3 Complex Semantic Types

```jac
obj CodeAnalysis {
    has issues: list[str];
    has suggestions: list[str];
    has complexity_score: int;
    has summary: str;
}

sem analyze.return = """
Return a CodeAnalysis object with:
- issues: List of problems found
- suggestions: Improvement recommendations
- complexity_score: 1-10 complexity rating
- summary: One paragraph overview
""";

def analyze(code: str) -> CodeAnalysis by llm;
```

---

## The `by` Operator and LLM Delegation

### 1 Basic Usage

```jac
# Function delegation
def translate(text: str, target_lang: str) -> str by llm;

def summarize(article: str) -> str by llm;

def extract_entities(text: str) -> list[str] by llm;

# Inline expression
with entry {
    response = "Explain quantum computing in simple terms" by llm;
}
```

### 2 Chained Transformations

```jac
with entry {
    text = "Some input text";
    result = text
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Correct grammar"))
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Simplify language"))
        |> (lambda t: str -> str: t by llm("Translate to Spanish"));
}
```

### 3 Model Configuration

```jac
def summarize(text: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="gpt-4",
    temperature=0.7,
    max_tokens=2000
);

def creative_story(prompt: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="claude-sonnet-4-6",
    temperature=1.0
);
```

**Configuration Parameters:**

| Parameter | Type | Description |
|-----------|------|-------------|
| `model_name` | str | LLM provider/model identifier |
| `temperature` | float | Creativity (0.0-2.0) |
| `max_tokens` | int | Maximum response tokens |
| `stream` | bool | Enable streaming output |
| `tools` | list | Functions for tool calling (enables ReAct loop) |
| `context` | list[str] | Additional system instructions |

### Type Validation

byLLM validates that LLM responses match the declared return type. If the LLM returns an invalid type, byLLM will:

1. **Attempt coercion** -- e.g., string `"5"` becomes integer `5`
2. **Raise an error** if coercion fails

This means your Jac type system functions as the LLM's output schema. Declaring `-> int` guarantees you receive an integer, and declaring `-> MyObj` guarantees you receive a properly structured object.

### 4 Tool Calling (ReAct)

```jac
# Stub implementations for API calls
def fetch_weather_api(city: str) -> str {
    return f"Weather data for {city}";
}

def web_search_api(query: str) -> list[str] {
    return [f"Result for {query}"];
}

def get_weather(city: str) -> str {
    # Actual implementation
    return fetch_weather_api(city);
}

def search_web(query: str) -> list[str] {
    # Actual implementation
    return web_search_api(query);
}

def answer_question(question: str) -> str by llm(
    tools=[get_weather, search_web]
);

# The LLM can now call these tools to answer questions
with entry {
    result = answer_question("What's the weather in Paris?");
}
```

### 5 Streaming Responses

```jac
def stream_story(prompt: str) -> str by llm(stream=True);

# Returns generator
with entry {
    for chunk in stream_story("Tell me a story") {
        print(chunk, end="");
    }
}
```

### 6 Multimodal Input

```jac
import from byllm { Image, Video }

def describe_image(image: Image) -> str by llm;
def analyze_video(video: Video) -> str by llm;

# Usage
with entry {
    description = describe_image(Image("photo.jpg"));
    description = describe_image(Image("https://example.com/image.png"));
}
```

### 7 Testing with MockLLM

```jac
def classify(text: str) -> str by llm(
    model_name="mockllm",
    config={"outputs": ["positive", "negative", "neutral"]}
);

test "classification" {
    result = classify("Great product!");
    assert result in ["positive", "negative", "neutral"];
}
```

### 9 Configuration via jac.toml

```toml
[plugins.byllm.model]
default = "gpt-4"

[plugins.byllm.call_params]
temperature = 0.7
max_tokens = 1000

[plugins.byllm.litellm]
api_base = "http://localhost:4000"
```

### 10 Python Library Mode

Use `by` in pure Python with decorators:

```python
from byllm import by, Model

@by(Model("gpt-4"))
def summarize(text: str) -> str:
    """Summarize the given text."""
    pass

result = summarize("Long article text...")
```

---

## Agentic AI Patterns

### 1 AI Agents as Walkers

```jac
walker AIAgent {
    has goal: str;
    has memory: list = [];

    can decide with Node entry {
        context = f"Goal: {self.goal}\nCurrent: {here}\nMemory: {self.memory}";
        decision = context by llm("Decide next action");
        self.memory.append({"location": here, "decision": decision});
        # Act on decision
        visit [-->];
    }
}
```

### 2 Tool-Using Agents

Agents combine LLM reasoning with tool functions. The LLM decides which tools to call and in what order (ReAct loop):

```jac
import from byllm.lib { Model }

glob llm = Model(model_name="gpt-4o");

glob kb: dict = {
    "products": ["Widget A", "Widget B", "Service X"],
    "prices": {"Widget A": 99, "Widget B": 149, "Service X": 29},
    "inventory": {"Widget A": 50, "Widget B": 0, "Service X": 999}
};

"""List all available products."""
def list_products() -> list[str] {
    return kb["products"];
}

"""Get the price of a product."""
def get_price(product: str) -> str {
    if product in kb["prices"] {
        return f"${kb['prices'][product]}";
    }
    return "Product not found";
}

"""Check if a product is in stock."""
def check_inventory(product: str) -> str {
    qty = kb["inventory"].get(product, 0);
    return f"In stock ({qty} available)" if qty > 0 else "Out of stock";
}

def sales_agent(request: str) -> str by llm(
    tools=[list_products, get_price, check_inventory]
);
sem sales_agent = "Help customers browse products, check prices and availability.";
```

### 3 Context Injection with `incl_info`

Pass additional runtime context to the LLM without modifying function signatures:

```jac
glob company_info = """
Company: TechCorp
Products: CloudDB, SecureAuth, DataViz
Support Hours: 9 AM - 5 PM EST
""";

def support_agent(question: str) -> str by llm(
    incl_info={"company_context": company_info}
);
sem support_agent = "Answer customer questions about our products and services.";
```

The `incl_info` dict keys and values are injected into the prompt as additional context. This is useful for dynamic information that changes between calls.

### 4 Agentic Walkers

Combine tools with graph traversal for AI agents that navigate data structures:

```jac
node Document {
    has title: str;
    has content: str;
    has summary: str = "";
}

def summarize(content: str) -> str by llm();
sem summarize = "Summarize this document in 2-3 sentences.";

walker DocumentAgent {
    has query: str;

    can process with Root entry {
        all_docs = [-->](?:Document);

        for doc in all_docs {
            if self.query.lower() in doc.content.lower() {
                doc.summary = summarize(doc.content);
                report {"title": doc.title, "summary": doc.summary};
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### 5 Multi-Agent Systems

```jac
walker Coordinator {
    can coordinate with Root entry {
        research = root spawn Researcher(topic="AI");
        writer = root spawn Writer(style="technical");
        reviewer = root spawn Reviewer();

        report {
            "research": research.reports,
            "draft": writer.reports,
            "review": reviewer.reports
        };
    }
}
```

---

## Learn More

**Tutorials:**

- [byLLM Quickstart](../../tutorials/ai/quickstart.md) - Your first AI function
- [Structured Outputs](../../tutorials/ai/structured-outputs.md) - Type-safe LLM responses
- [Agentic AI](../../tutorials/ai/agentic.md) - Tool calling and ReAct pattern

**Examples:**

- [EmailBuddy](../../tutorials/examples/emailbuddy.md) - AI email assistant
- [RAG Chatbot](../../tutorials/examples/rag-chatbot.md) - Document Q&A

**Related Reference:**

- [byLLM Reference](../plugins/byllm.md) - Complete API documentation
