docs/docs/reference/language/walker-responses.md, before:

# Walker Response Patterns

This reference explains how walker responses work and the common patterns for handling them.

> **Related:**
>
> - [Graph Operations](graph-operations.md) - Node creation, traversal, and deletion
> - [Part III: OSP](osp.md) - Walker and node fundamentals
> - [Build a Todo App](../../tutorials/fullstack/todo-app.md) - Full tutorial using these patterns

---

## The `.reports` Array

Every time a walker executes a `report` statement, the value is appended to a `.reports` array. When you spawn a walker, you receive this array in the response.

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can do_work with Root entry {
        report "first";   # reports[0]
        report "second";  # reports[1]
    }
}

with entry {
    # Spawning the walker
    response = root spawn MyWalker();
    print(response.reports);  # ["first", "second"]
}
```

## Common Patterns

### Pattern 1: Single Report (Recommended)

The cleanest pattern accumulates data internally and reports once at the end:

```jac
node Item {
    has data: str;
}

walker:priv ListItems {
    has items: list = [];

    can collect with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can gather with Item entry {
        self.items.append(here.data);
    }

    can finish with Root exit {
        report self.items;  # Single report with all data
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn ListItems();
    items = result.reports[0];  # The complete list
}
```

**When to use:** Most read operations, listing data, aggregations.

### Pattern 2: Report Per Node

Reports each item as it's found during traversal:

```jac
node Item {
    has name: str;
}

walker:priv FindMatches {
    has search_term: str;

    can search with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can check with Item entry {
        if self.search_term in here.name {
            report here;  # One report per match
        }
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn FindMatches(search_term="test");
    matches = result.reports;  # Array of all matching nodes
}
```

**When to use:** Search operations, filtering, finding specific nodes.

### Pattern 3: Operation + Result

Performs an operation and reports a summary:

```jac
node Item {
    has name: str;
}

walker:priv CreateItem {
    has name: str;

    can create with Root entry {
        new_item = here ++> Item(name=self.name);
        report new_item[0];  # Report the created item
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn CreateItem(name="New Item");
    created = result.reports[0];  # The new item
}
```

**When to use:** Create, update, delete operations.

### Pattern 4: Nested Walker Spawning

When one walker spawns another, their reports combine:

```jac
walker:priv InnerWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "inner data";
    }
}

walker:priv OuterWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        # Spawn inner walker - its reports go to OUR reports array
        inner_result = root spawn InnerWalker();

        # inner_result.reports[0] = "inner data"
        # But this is a NEW response object, not added to our reports

        # Our own report
        report {"outer": "data", "inner": inner_result.reports[0]};
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn OuterWalker();
    # result.reports[0] = {"outer": "data", "inner": "inner data"}
}
```

**Important:** Nested walker spawns return their own response object. Their reports don't automatically merge with the parent walker's reports.

### Pattern 5: Multiple Reports (Complex Operations)

Some operations naturally produce multiple reports:

```jac
def do_processing(input: str) -> list {
    return [input, input + "_processed"];
}

walker:priv ProcessAndSummarize {
    has input: str;

    can process with Root entry {
        # First report: raw results
        results = do_processing(self.input);
        report results;

        # Second report: summary
        report {
            "count": len(results),
            "status": "complete"
        };
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn ProcessAndSummarize(input="data");
    raw_results = result.reports[0];  # First report
    summary = result.reports[1];       # Second report
}
```

**When to use:** Operations that produce both detailed results and summaries.

## Safe Access Patterns

Always handle the possibility of empty reports:

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "data";
    }
}

def process(item: any) {
    print(item);
}

with entry {
    # Safe single report access
    result = root spawn MyWalker();
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else None;

    # Safe with default value
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else [];

    # Check length for multiple reports
    if result.reports and len(result.reports) > 1 {
        first = result.reports[0];
        second = result.reports[1];
    }

    # Iterate all reports
    for item in (result.reports if result.reports else []) {
        process(item);
    }
}
```

## Response Object Structure

The full response object from `root spawn Walker()`:

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "result";
    }
}

with entry {
    response = root spawn MyWalker();

    # Available properties
    print(response.reports);    # Array of all reported values
}
```

## Best Practices

1. **Prefer single reports** - Accumulate data and report once at the end
2. **Use `with Root exit`** - Best place for final reports after traversal
3. **Document report structure** - Comment what each report index contains
4. **Always check `.reports`** - It may be empty or undefined
5. **Keep reports serializable** - Stick to dicts, lists, strings, numbers, bools

## Anti-Patterns

### Don't: Report in a loop without accumulation

```jac
node Item {
    has data: str;
}

# Bad: Creates many small reports
walker:priv BadPattern {
    can process with Item entry {
        report here.data;  # N reports for N items
    }
}

# Good: Accumulate and report once
walker:priv GoodPattern {
    has items: list = [];

    can start with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can process with Item entry {
        self.items.append(here.data);
    }

    can finish with Root exit {
        report self.items;  # One report with all items
    }
}
```

### Don't: Assume report order without documentation

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report ["item1", "item2"];
        report {"count": 2};
    }
}

with entry {
    result = root spawn MyWalker();

    # Bad: Magic indices
    data = result.reports[0];
    meta = result.reports[1];

    # Good: Document or structure clearly
    # reports[0]: List of items
    # reports[1]: Metadata object
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else [];
    meta = result.reports[1] if len(result.reports) > 1 else {};
}
```

Commit message:

Reorganize docs into two-section nav (Get Started + Full Documentation)
Restructure the documentation site from a 4-section layout to a cleaner
2-section model: "Get Started" for onboarding and "Full Documentation"
for topic-organized tutorials and reference material.

Key changes:
- Restructure mkdocs.yml nav into Get Started / Full Documentation / Community / Showcase
- Migrate unique content from duplicate tutorials into reference docs before deletion
- Delete 14 redundant/orphaned files with proper redirects for old URLs
- Fix all cross-references to point to correct destinations
- Add community showcase page with Jac Builder and Playground links
- Add "Coming from JS/TS" and "Coming from Other Languages" tips to FAQ
- Replace em-dashes with double hyphens per linting rules

docs/docs/reference/language/walker-responses.md, after:

# Walker Response Patterns

This reference explains how walker responses work and the common patterns for handling them.

> **Related:**
>
> - [Graph Operations](graph-operations.md) - Node creation, traversal, and deletion
> - [Part III: OSP](osp.md) - Walker and node fundamentals
> - [Build an AI Day Planner](../../tutorials/first-app/build-ai-day-planner.md) - Full tutorial using these patterns

---

## The `.reports` Array

Every time a walker executes a `report` statement, the value is appended to a `.reports` array. When you spawn a walker, you receive this array in the response.

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can do_work with Root entry {
        report "first";   # reports[0]
        report "second";  # reports[1]
    }
}

with entry {
    # Spawning the walker
    response = root spawn MyWalker();
    print(response.reports);  # ["first", "second"]
}
```

## Common Patterns

### Pattern 1: Single Report (Recommended)

The cleanest pattern accumulates data internally and reports once at the end:

```jac
node Item {
    has data: str;
}

walker:priv ListItems {
    has items: list = [];

    can collect with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can gather with Item entry {
        self.items.append(here.data);
    }

    can finish with Root exit {
        report self.items;  # Single report with all data
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn ListItems();
    items = result.reports[0];  # The complete list
}
```

**When to use:** Most read operations, listing data, aggregations.

This is the **accumulator pattern** -- the standard approach for collecting data from a graph traversal. The walker flows through three stages:

1. **Enter root** → initiate traversal with `visit [-->]`
2. **Visit each node** → gather data into walker state (`self.items`)
3. **Exit root** → report the accumulated result

The `with Root exit` ability fires after the walker has finished visiting all queued nodes and returns to root, making it the ideal place for a single consolidated report.

!!! tip "Accumulator in Frontend"
    When calling this pattern from client code, access the result with `result.reports[0]` -- there is always exactly one report containing the full collection.

For a complete walkthrough of this pattern in a full-stack app, see [Build an AI Day Planner](../../tutorials/first-app/build-ai-day-planner.md).

### Pattern 2: Report Per Node

Reports each item as it's found during traversal:

```jac
node Item {
    has name: str;
}

walker:priv FindMatches {
    has search_term: str;

    can search with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can check with Item entry {
        if self.search_term in here.name {
            report here;  # One report per match
        }
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn FindMatches(search_term="test");
    matches = result.reports;  # Array of all matching nodes
}
```

**When to use:** Search operations, filtering, finding specific nodes.

### Pattern 3: Operation + Result

Performs an operation and reports a summary:

```jac
node Item {
    has name: str;
}

walker:priv CreateItem {
    has name: str;

    can create with Root entry {
        new_item = here ++> Item(name=self.name);
        report new_item[0];  # Report the created item
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn CreateItem(name="New Item");
    created = result.reports[0];  # The new item
}
```

**When to use:** Create, update, delete operations.

### Pattern 4: Nested Walker Spawning

When one walker spawns another, their reports combine:

```jac
walker:priv InnerWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "inner data";
    }
}

walker:priv OuterWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        # Spawn inner walker - its reports go to OUR reports array
        inner_result = root spawn InnerWalker();

        # inner_result.reports[0] = "inner data"
        # But this is a NEW response object, not added to our reports

        # Our own report
        report {"outer": "data", "inner": inner_result.reports[0]};
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn OuterWalker();
    # result.reports[0] = {"outer": "data", "inner": "inner data"}
}
```

**Important:** Nested walker spawns return their own response object. Their reports don't automatically merge with the parent walker's reports.

### Pattern 5: Multiple Reports (Complex Operations)

Some operations naturally produce multiple reports:

```jac
def do_processing(input: str) -> list {
    return [input, input + "_processed"];
}

walker:priv ProcessAndSummarize {
    has input: str;

    can process with Root entry {
        # First report: raw results
        results = do_processing(self.input);
        report results;

        # Second report: summary
        report {
            "count": len(results),
            "status": "complete"
        };
    }
}

with entry {
    # Usage
    result = root spawn ProcessAndSummarize(input="data");
    raw_results = result.reports[0];  # First report
    summary = result.reports[1];       # Second report
}
```

**When to use:** Operations that produce both detailed results and summaries.

## Safe Access Patterns

Always handle the possibility of empty reports:

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "data";
    }
}

def process(item: any) {
    print(item);
}

with entry {
    # Safe single report access
    result = root spawn MyWalker();
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else None;

    # Safe with default value
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else [];

    # Check length for multiple reports
    if result.reports and len(result.reports) > 1 {
        first = result.reports[0];
        second = result.reports[1];
    }

    # Iterate all reports
    for item in (result.reports if result.reports else []) {
        process(item);
    }
}
```

## Response Object Structure

The full response object from `root spawn Walker()`:

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report "result";
    }
}

with entry {
    response = root spawn MyWalker();

    # Available properties
    print(response.reports);    # Array of all reported values
}
```

## Best Practices

1. **Prefer single reports** - Accumulate data and report once at the end
2. **Use `with Root exit`** - Best place for final reports after traversal
3. **Document report structure** - Comment what each report index contains
4. **Always check `.reports`** - It may be empty or undefined
5. **Keep reports serializable** - Stick to dicts, lists, strings, numbers, bools

## Anti-Patterns

### Don't: Report in a loop without accumulation

```jac
node Item {
    has data: str;
}

# Bad: Creates many small reports
walker:priv BadPattern {
    can process with Item entry {
        report here.data;  # N reports for N items
    }
}

# Good: Accumulate and report once
walker:priv GoodPattern {
    has items: list = [];

    can start with Root entry {
        visit [-->];
    }

    can process with Item entry {
        self.items.append(here.data);
    }

    can finish with Root exit {
        report self.items;  # One report with all items
    }
}
```

### Don't: Assume report order without documentation

```jac
walker:priv MyWalker {
    can work with Root entry {
        report ["item1", "item2"];
        report {"count": 2};
    }
}

with entry {
    result = root spawn MyWalker();

    # Bad: Magic indices
    data = result.reports[0];
    meta = result.reports[1];

    # Good: Document or structure clearly
    # reports[0]: List of items
    # reports[1]: Metadata object
    data = result.reports[0] if result.reports else [];
    meta = result.reports[1] if len(result.reports) > 1 else {};
}
```
