docs/docs/learn/tool_suite.md, before:

# Jac Tool Suite

!!! note
    This is a comprehensive list of the recognized tools for developing Jac applications

## Jac VS Code Extension

This [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jaseci-labs.jaclang-extension) provides quality-of-life improvements when writing Jac programs in VS Code.

This extension includes:

- Jac Intellisense (completion, hints, docs, etc.)
- Jac syntax highlighting
- Jac Debugger
- Jac Graph visualizer

To specifically learn how to setup the debugger or graph-visualizer check out the [Debugger Tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/debugger/)

??? tip "Developing a Jac Scale Native application?"
    The debugger and graph visualizer included in the Jac VS Code Extension support only local Jac programs. They are not currently compatible with Scale Native. To visualize graphs for Scale Native programs, refer to [Jac Lens](#jac-lens).

## Jac Playground

The [Jac Playground](https://www.jac-lang.org/playground/) provides an interactive graph visualizer and online debugger. This tool is meant to be used to sample quick Jac scripts without needing to setup an entire project on your own machine.

The Jac playground includes an online editor with:

- Syntax Highlighting
- One-click Execution
- Debug Mode
- Real-time Graph Visualizer

It's a fast and beginner-friendly way to learn Jac, experiment with Object-Spatial Programming, or prototype ideas!

To learn more, check out the [Jac Playground tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/jac_playground/).

## Jac-GPT

[Jac-GPT](https://jac-gpt.jaseci.org/) is an agentic chatbot that allows you to ask questions about Jac's documentation. It is currently available only in the browser.

When you ask Jac-GPT a question, it links back to relevant pages from the tutorial documentation for further reading.

## Jac Lens

Jac Lens is another tool for visualizing your Jac object-spatial graphs. Unlike the VS Code Extension and Jac Playground, Jac Lens specifically supports graph visualization for Scale Native applications.

To learn how to configure a graph visualizer for your Scale Native program, check out the [Jac Lens Tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/jac-lens/)

Commit message:

Typestub feature for python type checking interop

docs/docs/learn/tool_suite.md, after:

# Jac Tool Suite

!!! note
    This is a comprehensive list of the recognized tools for developing Jac applications

## Jac VS Code Extension

This [VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jaseci-labs.jaclang-extension) provides quality-of-life improvements when writing Jac programs in VS Code.

This extension includes:

- Jac Intellisense (completion, hints, docs, etc.)
- Jac syntax highlighting
- Jac Debugger
- Jac Graph visualizer
- [Python Type Checking Integration](./tools/pylance_integration.md) - Generate `.pyi` stubs for Pylance/Pyright

To specifically learn how to setup the debugger or graph-visualizer check out the [Debugger Tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/debugger/)

??? tip "Developing a Jac Scale Native application?"
    The debugger and graph visualizer included in the Jac VS Code Extension support only local Jac programs. They are not currently compatible with Scale Native. To visualize graphs for Scale Native programs, refer to [Jac Lens](#jac-lens).

??? tip "Working with mixed Jac and Python codebases?"
    Enable automatic stub generation to get Python type checking support for your Jac modules. See the [Pylance Integration Guide](./tools/pylance_integration.md) for setup instructions.

## Jac Playground

The [Jac Playground](https://www.jac-lang.org/playground/) provides an interactive graph visualizer and online debugger. This tool is meant to be used to sample quick Jac scripts without needing to setup an entire project on your own machine.

The Jac playground includes an online editor with:

- Syntax Highlighting
- One-click Execution
- Debug Mode
- Real-time Graph Visualizer

It's a fast and beginner-friendly way to learn Jac, experiment with Object-Spatial Programming, or prototype ideas!

To learn more, check out the [Jac Playground tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/jac_playground/).

## Jac-GPT

[Jac-GPT](https://jac-gpt.jaseci.org/) is an agentic chatbot that allows you to ask questions about Jac's documentation. It is currently available only in the browser.

When you ask Jac-GPT a question, it links back to relevant pages from the tutorial documentation for further reading.

## Jac Lens

Jac Lens is another tool for visualizing your Jac object-spatial graphs. Unlike the VS Code Extension and Jac Playground, Jac Lens specifically supports graph visualization for Scale Native applications.

To learn how to configure a graph visualizer for your Scale Native program, check out the [Jac Lens Tutorial](https://www.jac-lang.org/learn/jac-lens/)
