docs/docs/learn/jac-cloud/introduction.md, before:

# Introduction to Jac Cloud

## What is Jac Cloud?

Jac Cloud is a powerful cloud-native framework that transforms your Jac applications into production-ready API servers with minimal configuration. It bridges the gap between local Jac development and scalable cloud deployment, providing enterprise-grade features out of the box.

With Jac Cloud, you can:

- Deploy your Jac applications as RESTful APIs, WebSocket services, and scheduled tasks
- Simply replace `jac run` with `jac serve` to transform your application into a fully-featured web service
- Access a rich set of cloud-native features without writing additional code

## Key Features at a Glance

### Instant API Generation

- Automatically converts Jac walkers into REST endpoints
- Supports all HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.)
- Built-in OpenAPI/Swagger documentation at `/docs`

### Authentication & Authorization

- Token-based authentication system
- Role-based access control
- Configurable endpoint security

### Real-time Communication

- WebSocket support for real-time applications
- Channel-based messaging
- Client and user notification systems

### Task Scheduling

- Cron-based scheduling
- Interval-based tasks
- One-time date triggers

### Production-Ready Features

- Comprehensive logging with Elastic integration
- Environment variable configuration
- Health monitoring and metrics
- File upload support

### Cloud Integration

- Kubernetes deployment support
- Docker containerization
- ConfigMap-based configuration
- Horizontal scaling capabilities

## Quick Start (5-Minute Setup)

The simplest way to start with Jac Cloud is to take an existing Jac application and serve it:

```bash
# Install Jac Cloud
pip install jac-cloud

# Instead of running locally
jac run main.jac

# Serve as an API
jac serve main.jac
```

Your application will be available at `http://localhost:8000` with automatic API documentation at `http://localhost:8000/docs`.

## How Jac Cloud Works

Jac Cloud follows a modular architecture that includes:

- **Walker Endpoints**: Automatic REST API generation from walker declarations
- **WebSocket Manager**: Real-time bidirectional communication
- **Scheduler**: Background task execution
- **Authentication System**: Secure access control
- **Logging Framework**: Comprehensive request/response logging

## Perfect Use Cases for Beginners

Jac Cloud is ideal for:

- **Microservices**: Build scalable, independent services
- **Real-time Applications**: Chat systems, live updates, notifications
- **Data Processing APIs**: Transform and analyze data at scale
- **AI/ML Services**: Deploy machine learning models as APIs
- **IoT Backends**: Handle device communication and data ingestion
- **Task Automation**: Scheduled data processing and workflows

## Next Steps

Ready to get started? Check out these guides:

- [Quick Start Guide](quickstart.md) - Build your first Jac Cloud application
- [Walker Endpoints](quickstart.md#walker-endpoints) - Learn how to configure API endpoints
- [WebSocket Communication](websocket.md) - Add real-time features
- [Task Scheduling](scheduler.md) - Automate recurring tasks
- [Kubernetes Deployment](deployment.md) - Deploy to the cloud

<!-- ## Community and Support

Jac Cloud is part of the larger Jaseci ecosystem. Join our community to get help, share your projects, and contribute to the platform's growth.

---

*Transform your Jac applications into production-ready cloud services with Jac Cloud's powerful, yet simple framework.* -->

Commit message:

Complete Jac documentation rewrite - Phase 1-6
Major documentation overhaul including:

**Phase 1 - Critical Fixes:**
- Fixed CLI docs: removed jac clean, added jac dot/script/destroy/get_object
- Fixed jac format, jac enter, jac run parameters
- Added deprecation banners to all jac-cloud pages

**Phase 2 - New Structure:**
- Created 12 new Quick Reference sections (getting-started, language, cli, etc.)
- Archived jac-cloud content to docs/archive/
- Updated mkdocs.yml navigation with Quick Reference section

**Phase 3 - Core Content:**
- Enhanced language/syntax, language/osp, language/oop guides
- Comprehensive CLI reference with all 19 commands
- Complete jac.toml configuration reference

**Phase 4 - Plugin Documentation:**
- byLLM: MTP concepts, by llm() syntax, multimodal, agentic AI
- jac-client: components, state management, routing, auth
- jac-scale: REST API, authentication, K8s deployment

**Phase 5 - Advanced Topics:**
- Testing and debugging: test framework, jac dot, IR tools
- Advanced topics: concurrency, persistence, Python interop
- Updated 10 Jac Book chapters with cross-references

**Phase 6 - Polish:**
- Fixed 60+ broken links across documentation
- Created examples index with categorization
- Removed TODO comments, cleaned up navigation

docs/docs/learn/jac-cloud/introduction.md, after:

# Introduction to Jac Cloud

!!! warning "Deprecated - Use jac-scale Instead"
    **Jac Cloud has been deprecated and replaced by [jac-scale](../../production/index.md).**

    jac-scale provides the same functionality with improved Kubernetes integration, better memory management (L1/L2/L3 tiers), and enhanced scalability features.

    - For new projects, use `jac-scale` instead of `jac-cloud`
    - Existing jac-cloud applications should migrate to jac-scale
    - This documentation is preserved for reference only

## What is Jac Cloud?

Jac Cloud is a powerful cloud-native framework that transforms your Jac applications into production-ready API servers with minimal configuration. It bridges the gap between local Jac development and scalable cloud deployment, providing enterprise-grade features out of the box.

With Jac Cloud, you can:

- Deploy your Jac applications as RESTful APIs, WebSocket services, and scheduled tasks
- Simply replace `jac run` with `jac serve` to transform your application into a fully-featured web service
- Access a rich set of cloud-native features without writing additional code

## Key Features at a Glance

### Instant API Generation

- Automatically converts Jac walkers into REST endpoints
- Supports all HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.)
- Built-in OpenAPI/Swagger documentation at `/docs`

### Authentication & Authorization

- Token-based authentication system
- Role-based access control
- Configurable endpoint security

### Real-time Communication

- WebSocket support for real-time applications
- Channel-based messaging
- Client and user notification systems

### Task Scheduling

- Cron-based scheduling
- Interval-based tasks
- One-time date triggers

### Production-Ready Features

- Comprehensive logging with Elastic integration
- Environment variable configuration
- Health monitoring and metrics
- File upload support

### Cloud Integration

- Kubernetes deployment support
- Docker containerization
- ConfigMap-based configuration
- Horizontal scaling capabilities

## Quick Start (5-Minute Setup)

The simplest way to start with Jac Cloud is to take an existing Jac application and serve it:

```bash
# Install Jac Cloud
pip install jac-cloud

# Instead of running locally
jac run main.jac

# Serve as an API
jac serve main.jac
```

Your application will be available at `http://localhost:8000` with automatic API documentation at `http://localhost:8000/docs`.

## How Jac Cloud Works

Jac Cloud follows a modular architecture that includes:

- **Walker Endpoints**: Automatic REST API generation from walker declarations
- **WebSocket Manager**: Real-time bidirectional communication
- **Scheduler**: Background task execution
- **Authentication System**: Secure access control
- **Logging Framework**: Comprehensive request/response logging

## Perfect Use Cases for Beginners

Jac Cloud is ideal for:

- **Microservices**: Build scalable, independent services
- **Real-time Applications**: Chat systems, live updates, notifications
- **Data Processing APIs**: Transform and analyze data at scale
- **AI/ML Services**: Deploy machine learning models as APIs
- **IoT Backends**: Handle device communication and data ingestion
- **Task Automation**: Scheduled data processing and workflows

## Next Steps

Ready to get started? Check out these guides:

- [Quick Start Guide](quickstart.md) - Build your first Jac Cloud application
- [Walker Endpoints](quickstart.md#walker-endpoints) - Learn how to configure API endpoints
- [WebSocket Communication](websocket.md) - Add real-time features
- [Task Scheduling](scheduler.md) - Automate recurring tasks
- [Kubernetes Deployment](deployment.md) - Deploy to the cloud

<!-- ## Community and Support

Jac Cloud is part of the larger Jaseci ecosystem. Join our community to get help, share your projects, and contribute to the platform's growth.

---

*Transform your Jac applications into production-ready cloud services with Jac Cloud's powerful, yet simple framework.* -->
